The most important principle I learned as a lawyer studying international law in graduate school was that the global order only exists by virtue of mutual assent and consensus of its member-nation states. There is no higher enforcement authority. The institutional structures of the United Nations embody this concept. I was fortunate to come of age in a post-World War II environment where such global stability and prosperity were assumed — at least for countries with advanced economies.

Of course, there were exceptions. Cold War ideologies sparked conflict in Vietnam and Korea as well as democratic overthrows by the United States in South America and the Soviet Union in its eastern and central Asian blocs. We witnessed apartheid in South Africa, genocide in Rwanda, Cambodia and Serbia, along with creeping colonialism in Palestine and on other indigenous lands, i.e. Chile, along with civil wars. But by and large the arrangement held.

**Rise of the Bullies**

On September 11, 2001, however, fault lines that had been growing within the international body politic cracked wide open. Non-state actors, first named guerillas and later terrorists, announced their explosive governing strategy to a global audience. Were they a counter-weight to Western corporations’ decades-long exploitive labor and natural resource practices in “less-developed” regions? No matter, the West would not be bullied, even if the bully had revealed a weak spot in its global hegemon.

America’s revenge was calculated. A bully can be taken aback if you demonstrate the ability to destroy another bully — like Saddam Hussein. Since America was still wedded to the international order it had helped create, her opening shot was a diplomatic one at the U.N. General Assembly. Diplomacy is the antidote to bullies. The Second Gulf War had diplomatic cover. Now, after twenty years of Middle East wars, neither America nor anyone else needs the band aid of diplomacy to justify a war. Leaders just need to be bullies.

Putin proved that in 2022 with his invasion into Ukraine. Sure, he can say there were grievances (NATO pressure, historic losses, small-man syndrome) but he didn’t ask anybody or negotiate anything. Netanyahu too is a bully. He’s been bullying the Palestinians for generations. Hamas’ attack on Israel on October 7, 2023 opened the door for the war he had been craving for decades, just like 9/11 did for the Bush clan.

Next enter the Bully-in-Chief, Donald Trump, whose insulting, threatening language to those he deems weaker or vulnerable is part of his persona — a trait admired by his followers. Trump gravitates to dictators who are by design bullies. He may feel comfortable embracing Putin in Alaska, but for the rest of us, not so much.

**Rise of the Discontented**

I take a sleeping pill to get through the night. If I listen to the evening news before going to bed, I take another. Without a good night’s sleep, I will be restless and not at peace. Why? For me, this is a recent phenomenon. I am a retired U.N. lawyer, not worried about an unpredictable boss or getting kids through college. No, there is an underlying current of discontent that has disrupted my long-standing ability to sleep. And evidently, I am not alone.

Medical researchers over the past decade have become increasingly vocal about the growing problem of sleep deprivation worldwide. In 2024, The Lancet, an internationally-recognized British medical journal, called sleeplessness a neglected public health issue. That same year it was estimated that between 50–70 million Americans suffer from sleep disorders.

More recently, an article in _The Atlantic_ entitled “Why Americans Can’t Sleep: Insomnia has become a public-health emergency,” noted that 30 to 35 percent of Americans experience insomnia in its various symptoms. The home-shopping network QVC’s current promotion of Relaxium Sleep Advanced Strength is proof of this problem and the consumers’ need for help.

The causes of sleeplessness are usually attributed to lifestyle factors, medical conditions, or environmental issues. This approach seems outdated. Insomnia today is due to worry, fear, and anxiety. People are literally waking up to news and a future directed by bullies, not the international order or rule of law. They grasp how technology, governance, media narratives, and economic exploitation directed by powerful, unchecked interests (such as OPEC and its allies blocking a plastics treaty) can determine life or death, prosperity or poverty.

There is a shift going on from confusion or conviction to discontentedness and frustration enhanced by a lack of agency. Bullies don’t care that they are fueling this negative sentiment. Their ’s version of the future cannot address the malcontent of so many restless people.

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

**The Search for Moral Clarity**

The current crop of world leaders cannot steer us out of this global economic and ecological polycrisis. Their power depends on maintaining existing relationships between natural resources and finance. Even China, for all of its commitment to renewables, cannot rescue the Himalayan snowcap. We need to look elsewhere for moral leadership: first, within ourselves and second, to the powerless.

_Homo sapiens_ evolved in a planetary environment suitable for survival. Earth is the perfect distance from the sun with breathable air and pure water. To say that we are _part_ of nature is disrespectful. _We are nature_. Our thoughts and images of the natural world flow from cognition, perception and consciousness that evolved in tandem with physical attributes. Destroy the cocoon of your being and you destroy yourself — your “right to life.” We need to consciously connect the rhetoric on climate to our right to live.

This summer Norway experienced a prolonged heatwave fueled by global warning. Even the reindeer suffered, threatening the livelihoods of the Indigenous Sami communities, which have herded them for over 1000 years. “Such disruptions also threaten their health and their right to sustain a way of life — this makes climate change a human rights issue,” said Maja Vahlberg, an expert at the Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Center.

This then brings us to the second option: the powerless, composed of two groups of _homo sapiens_ — Indigenous communities and children. Both are rising up with moral authority to confront the bullies.

In 2008, Ecuador was the first country in the world to include “rights of nature” in its constitution. As a ten-year-long expat resident of Ecuador, I can confirm that the deep ancestral roots of Inca and pre-Inca peoples ignited this movement. Their worldview is community-centric and wholistic, eliminating the separation between man and nature. And Indigenous activists continue to win on legal and moral fronts. Mining concessions in the bio-diverse cloud forest of Ecuador were revoked in 2021 since they violated the rights of nature and were deemed unconstitutional by Ecuador’s highest court.

This year the Federation of Indigenous and Peasant Organizations of Azuay province in Ecuador, where Cuenca is located, plan an indefinite strike to protest gold mining permits that threaten Cuenca’s watershed. They are bolstered by a 2024 referendum showing that 80% of the community oppose the project. The moral message is clear. Over 500 countries have incorporated “rights of nature” into their legal framework.

Lastly, there are the youth — those least heard from but most impacted. Following Ecuador’s example, new legislation at state, national and international levels is drawing young people into leadership roles as plaintiffs. They are testing the judicial system to flesh out what three new legal principles mean in practice in order to save their lives: the right to a healthy environment, rights of future generations and government’s responsibility.

In 2024 a group of young people won a lawsuit against the state of Montana for [violating the right to](https://theconversation.com/montana-kids-win-historic-climate-lawsuit-heres-why-it-could-set-a-powerful-precedent-207907) a healthy environment spelled out in the state’s constitution. The state Supreme Court agreed with the plaintiffs and struck down a law barring the consideration of climate effects when evaluating proposals for fossil fuel extraction. In [Future Generations v. Ministry of the Environment and Others](https://climatecasechart.com/non-us-case/future-generation-v-ministry-environment-others/), a Colombian court agreed with young people who had sued the government in 2018. The court found that the government allowed [rampant deforestation in the Amazon](https://www.r2heinfo.com/casebook/future-generations-v-ministry-of-the-environment-and-others-colombia/), thus violating the pact of intergenerational equity. The public trust doctrine was also used by children in Hawaii who sued the state Department of Transportation for not doing enough to eliminate transportation emissions. Prior to trial, they reached an historic settlement where the state agreed to take significant actions to address the problem.

Perhaps the most far-reaching action was taken by law students in the Pacific Island country of Vanuatu. In 2019, they asked the U.N. General Assembly to request an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice on international legal obligations of states regarding climate change. In a unanimous opinion, the court stated that states’ obligations go beyond treaties and agreements and also arise from customary international law: law that states practice out of a sense of legal obligation.

More specifically, the court said states have a duty to prevent significant environmental harm and must exercise due diligence in assessing risk, and that companies and persons in their jurisdiction must comply with these duties. Second, states have a duty to cooperate with other states to protect the environment and solve related international economic, social, cultural, and humanitarian problems, adding that a healthy environment is a prerequisite for the enjoyment of human rights.

**Conclusion**

You may say, in response to these examples of moral clarity, that they are too abstract, isolated and limited in impact. But you would be wrong. There is momentum in all three arenas. Check YouTube, where it is easy to find both scientific and philosophical discussion on what it means to be a _homo sapien_. Yuval Noah Harari wrote a best-seller called _Sapiens,_ and his warnings on alien intelligence vs. human intelligence are thought-provoking. Thinking people are looking inward. As for the Indigenous populations and youth, they stand on solid moral ground. Given more time, momentum, and legal fine-tuning, they will continue to win.

The polycrisis of environment, finance, power, and inequality calls for a change in perspective. Where are the “roots and shoots” (as Jane Goodall would say) of moral clarity emerging to counter bullies and discontent? How can I help? Maybe you choose reading, meditation and introspection. Or you research an Indigenous or other Black or Brown community in your neighborhood fighting for environmental justice and join their ranks. Finally, it won’t be difficult to find an environmental lawyer in your state who is already advising young people on how to approach a climate-related lawsuit. See what they need and how you can help them, because young leaders are truly on the frontline.

**Carol E. Leutner** is an award-winning author, lawyer and former international civil servant. She writes on race, economics and culture.

You can learn more about Carol from her first book, _RACE CONSCIOUSNESS, A Personal and Political Journey,_ which won the 2024 Next Generation Indie Book award in the Memoir: History/Legacy category. Carol’s second book, _21st-CENTURY PARADIGM SHIFT: What it is and How to Thrive in It_, has now been published as in e-book. Both books are available on Amazon. She can be contacted at [www.carolleutner.com.](http://www.carolleutner.com./)