I am an American citizen who has lived abroad for the past thirty years, first for work and later in retirement. During that period and before that I always voted (with two exceptions) in U.S. elections and for some years before relocating, was active in the Democratic Party. The 2024 election for the presidency, however, has caused me to reflect on how I feel about electoral politics. This is what I have determined.

The position of the presidency rests in a subconscious but visceral position within the body politic as a whole and within each of its members. “Visceral” means felt as if in the internal organs of the body; dealing with an elemental emotion. This emotional connection is what Trump and his campaign so brilliantly revealed and captured. It’s as if they took the seminal Obama social media playbook, upped its game and perfected it over ten years on the campaign trail. But this time the root emotions tapped were not unity and hope, but fear and division. Trump’s first favor is revealing this connection between country and its leader. **By doing so, he has laid bare our weaknesses to force us to evolve.**

Which of these different sets of emotions we allow to live inside our bodies, however, depends **on the information we have about our current situation and our vision for the future. Without unpacking our diverse but shared experiences as Americans we cannot prosper as a nation.** This is not about statistics, opinion pieces, or propaganda from whatever source. It’s about struggling to articulate at least one common value between two, three, or a group of people and build from there. Can we find a shared emotional link or starting point so that politicians don’t continue to abuse our distance as a people and turn it into hate? We have to talk about our differences to find our commonalities.

The second favor we received from Trump is a lesson in civics. Civics is a social science dealing with the rights and duties of citizens. I am a retired international lawyer; rights and duties sound like legalize to me. Civics speaks to how citizens relate to each other. **Since the government is realized only by actions of its citizens, civics also includes how people in government relate to the governed.**

My common sense tells me that this definition of civics also contains an inherent balance between the two active nouns: responsibilities and duties. This principle of balance is what we were either not taught in school or that we forgot: the U.S. constitutional experiment is based on protecting the notion of balance. Over decades, the body politic replaced the rigors of civic participation with the fleeting “feel good” of the myth of the hero.

More important than a neat psychological analysis, however, are the real-life consequences of civic imbalance. Three startling examples are evident: politics, environment, and culture. Wealth concentration, due largely to technological innovation and regulatory capture, has compromised the balance of power in the U.S. Constitution. When the “unitary” power of a president under Article 1 systematically destroys the infrastructure of government authorized by Congress under Article 3, the scales are tipped. Whether the Article 2 courts can restore balance remains an open question.

**There is more at stake than just our civic arrangement, however**. At the same time, the natural world is telling us that we have an environmental imbalance. Private interests are more protected than public interests. The imbalance is not just an issue of financial incentives, it’s an issue of civic governance. Trillions of investment dollars flow into privately-owned artificial intelligence, while the air, water, land, flora, and fauna — the public sphere — deteriorate on a warming planet. What benefit does an AI agent or a cure for cancer offer a working man for whom health insurance is unattainable?

Trump’s election also reveals the stark relief of our nation’s cultural imbalance. One example will suffice. In 2023 I was fortunate to see an exhibition at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. entitled “The Land Carries Our Ancestors.” It was the gallery’s first exhibition curated by an Indigenous American citizen and featured fifty living Indigenous artists. The curator, Juanne Quick-to-See Smith, herself an artist, posted this informative text beside one of her works.

_“…language carries 1000 years of factual history. Colonial genocide sought to take our knowledge from us, our land, our food, cultural stories of oral history, our children and grandchildren and our encyclopedic language that names and describes the natural world and how we interact with it, all the plants, animals, insects, trees, mountains and waterways.”_

Now the National Gallery of Art has agreed to abide by one of Donald Trump’s first Executive Orders — to eliminate all words and actions related to Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI). Trump is giving us a lesson on how ignorance and civics don’t mix.

Over and above the irascible political landscape, there is a deeper lesson to be learned from the last election. Trump is challenging those who participated in the plebiscite to re-examine how they think about and approach the life gifted to them on planet Earth. If all of your assumptions about the stability of government, the value of private property, the superiority of capitalism, **or certain groups of people are** under threat, then you may need to replace these assumptions with some new building blocks. But where to start? We have to take care of ourselves.

Well-being commences on the inside by aligning diet and exercise with good health practices to the best of one’s ability. Attention to the process is what matters, because the body is a reflection of the clarity and purity of thought. Next, find your emotional core and identify what nurtures it. Love and caring? Or fear and anger? These emotional opposites produce conflicting actions, words, and outcomes. You can replace fear by practicing new thought patterns based on a holistic view of reality **and practice applying this concept to your daily civic engagement”**

The groundbreaking scientific discoveries of Einstein revealed that human beings form part of a whole we call the universe. Although we experience ourselves, thoughts, and sentiments as separate from the rest, this is a kind of optical illusion of our consciousness. We must break out of this prison by expanding our circle of compassion to all living creatures. Every person, thing, event, or idea is connected. This requires an evolution of consciousness to stop judging and listen to what our **everyday** existence is telling us about how to act anew in a changing world. When the emotional core is filled with wonder of life’s reciprocity to our openness, there will be no need for demagogues or lies. And that is Trump’s final favor.

©Carol E. Leutner 2025

**Carol E. Leutner** is an award-winning author, lawyer and former international civil servant. She writes on race, economics and culture.

You can learn more about Carol from her first book, _RACE CONSCIOUSNESS, A Personal and Political Journey,_ which won the 2024 Next Generation Indie Book award in the Memoir: History/Legacy category. Carol’s second book, _21st-CENTURY PARADIGM SHIFT: What it is and How to Thrive in It_, has now been published as in e-book. Both books are available on Amazon. She can be contacted at [www.carolleutner.com.](http://www.carolleutner.com./)
