<p>Feeling depressed about where our society is headed? Maybe it’s time for a paradigm shift.</p>
<p>What is a paradigm shift? Carol E. Leutner’s new book, <i>21st Century Paradigm Shift: What It Is and How to Thrive In It</i>, defines it as an important change that happens when the usual way of thinking about or doing something is replaced by a new and different way. She explains it so that anyone can understand.</p>
<p>The author brings to our attention the number of crises that humanity faces. Global warming, the threat of nuclear war, and the rapid advance of artificial intelligence are forcing us into an unstable and insecure future. A personal examination of our 21st century reality, her book seeks to address the deeper problem of an outdated world view.</p>
<p>Although Carol’s work on paradigms began with an award-winning academic journal article over forty years ago, this up-dated version is more relevant than ever.</p>
<p><strong>What’s Inside Paradigm Shift?</strong>
Carol defines paradigm as “a philosophical or theoretical framework of any kind.” The author leads us through millennia of human existence. Along the way she cites philosophers and scientists who over the centuries provided guidance on how modern thought and, particularly, economic thinking evolved.</p>
<p>Society’s view of reality and the world changed from a religious paradigm to a scientific one with Isaac Newton’s mathematical and scientific discoveries at the beginning of the seventeenth century.</p>
<p>In the early twentieth century, Albert Einstein and his peers opened the door to a revised understanding of reality based on the theory of relativity and quantum physics. They viewed reality as multi-dimensional, integrated and relational. Observers influenced the outcome of scientific experiments. The Newtonian paradigm of materialism was not only insufficient but may have led to the existential crises we face today.</p>
<p>Carol Leutner</p>
<p>Carol explores how the new physics will not only change our worldview, but also influence our cultural, political and economic future. Surreal political developments occurring today make her book that more attractive for a non-academic audience, offering both a way to understand these dramatic events as well as a way out, beyond the chaos erupting daily.</p>
<p>Underneath it all, she calls for a change in consciousness and the way humanity views reality and each other. The book is dedicated to all who seek a higher level of consciousness.</p>
<p><strong>Last Words</strong>
In the epilogue Carol writes, “There is no guarantee, obligation, or twist of fate that will ensure species survival. It doesn´t matter to the universe that this aspect of life, or any other, survives. It only matters to us and what we consider valuable. Science has already revealed that there is life beyond our planet. Life will continue to evolve in whatever circumstances enable it.”</p>
<p>While we can still make intelligent choices to overcome society’s malaise, let’s begin by educating ourselves about these pressing issues. I recommend reading 21st Century Paradigm Shift as a great way to start!</p>
<p><strong>About the Author</strong>
Carol has been a lawyer, political activist, and international civil servant. A graduate of the University of Maryland, she also earned a joint MBA/JD from the University of New Mexico and a Masters in International Law from Georgetown Law School. She resides in Cuenca.</p>
<p>Her research on paradigms began as an independent study on the history of economic thought during her MBA program. She finished the research paper in 1978. It was published in the Review of Social Economy in 1982 and received special recognition at the American Economic Association ‘s annual meeting.</p>
<p>The author’s first book, <i>Race Consciousness, A Personal and Political Journey</i>, won the prestigious 2024 New Generation Indie Book Award in the Memoir: History/ Legacy category. It is available in paperback and e-book formats on Amazon and in paperback at Cuenca’s Carolina Bookstore. You can learn more about Carol at carolleutner.com.</p>
<p><strong>How to buy your copy</strong>
<i>21st Century Paradigm Shift: What It Is and How to Thrive In It</i> is available as an <a href="https://www.amazon.com/21st-Century-Paradigm-Shift-Thrive-ebook/dp/B0DTZQ5X8B/ref=sr_1_1?crid=1KKPODWLFYD3H&amp;dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.Zh0Tbp6LH58yEOJQcpElPw.o5QBdEiXkXr9fH_d6Kfs-l1St8U8CIzAniR1B4GquEk&amp;dib_tag=se&amp;keywords=21st+Century+Paradigm+Shift%3A+What+It+Is+and+How+to+Thrive+In+It&amp;qid=1742593236&amp;sprefix=21st+century+paradigm+shift+what+it+is+and+how+to+thrive+in+it%2Caps%2C205&amp;sr=8-1">e-Book on Amazon</a>. Printed copies are available at Cuenca’s Carolina Bookstore with the author’s upcoming appearance to be announced.</p>
