<div>
<div class='text-h6'>MOTHER NATURE IS NOT HAPPY ...</div>

**_because she’s having trouble coping with capitalism_**
</div>

by Carol E. Leutner

You don’t need to do much more than go out the front door of your house or apartment building to know that Mother Nature is not happy. Her way of communicating is to unleash global heat exceeding historical records and seasons, consecutive hurricanes that stretch beyond coastal cities and rapidly melting glaciers. In the South American Andes, where I live, rivers run dry. The impact is four-fold: water rationing, blackouts due to limited hydropower generation, tinder-box forests vulnerable to wildfires and agricultural productivity and Indigenous communities at risk.

The body politic responds in different ways. Some refuse to hear Mother Nature’s message and align with political leaders holding similar views. For others the climate emergency nags on their subconscious, but fails to consciously affect their daily life. For those who have experienced the upheaval of climate change, worry, anxiety, and even depression run deep. Finally, a growing majority blame the world’s dominant economic system, capitalism, and the political and institutional structures that protect it — the subject of this essay.

I could start by unpacking the obvious: excessive profits from fossil fuel conglomerates, unreasonable and outdated taxpayer subsidies to the oil and gas industry buttressed by entrenched lobbying, and questionable carbon-capture strategies that don’t benefit pristine environments and provide a permission structure for continuing pollution. In democracies such problems should be addressed through elections. In autocracies (civil, military or religious). change depends on how the leadership balances personal interest, national stability and public tolerance. After decades of negotiations on climate change which respect national sovereignty and international cooperation, political leadership has failed to respond in a manner proportionate to the emergency. More talk will likely produce similar results. Thus, I agree with economist Jeffrey Sachs’s comment at a sideline event during the September 2024 annual U.N. General Assembly: it is time to start discussing the philosophical issues that underpin our current dilemma. He is listening to Mother Nature.

I propose that we follow Professor Sachs’s suggestion and examine capitalism from a philosophical perspective. This approach may provide clues as to why capitalism and Mother Nature are not compatible. Capitalism, like every economic system, is a way of explaining how human beings interact with natural resources and technology to provide life-sustaining products and processes. But beyond those rather cold and mundane acts there is an understanding or shared view of reality that supports communal economic activity. Capitalism’s philosophical foundations grew out of the scientific work of Sir Isaac Newton during the seventieth century, so this is where our current inquiry should begin.

**Science is a Philosophy**

Prior to Newton, Western European societies adhered to a religious worldview. The Church was a dominant economic actor and even feudal political leaders, i.e. kings, equated themselves with God. Newton, along with a few others like Copernicus, changed all that. He used the scientific method to prove that physical reality is made up of matter — substances that could be dissected, studied and manipulated. If there was a God, he was one who set the universe in motion to act on immutable natural laws. Time and space were absolute. What one perceived was real as defined by physics — a theory known as mechanical materialism.

A century later, philosopher Adam Smith picked up on Newton’s work and applied this worldview to the social, economic and political realms. The driving force behind capitalism is **self-interest**, which like gravity, is natural and could not be changed. Like matter, the economic system was composed of **manipulable parts**: land, labor and capital. Self-regulating markets were the **invisible hand** of God who had set it all in motion. Step back from day-to-day living and take a wider view. Global capitalism still operates on these three fundamental building blocks, with the possible exception that capital and its handmaiden, technology, have now trumped land and labor.

What are the implications for Mother Nature? For centuries, she gave humanity lots of room to play. Notwithstanding plagues and floods, the planet provided a bounty of resources to feed the new Industrial Revolution, which sped forward in tandem with capitalism and its sister maladies of colonization and exploitation. Individuals, corporate entities, and nation states just had to get on board with the program. That is, until a few forward-looking thinkers like Rachael Carson (_The Silent Spring_) and Ernst Schumacher (_Small is Beautiful_) put forth the notion of limits to growth in the mid-twentieth century. In areas where growth is still possible, military and AI technologies, questions of desirability arise.

**An Alternative View of Reality**

Capitalism is no longer fit for purpose because it no longer reflects the nature of reality. Albert Einstein and his peers revealed that Newtonian physics applies to only a limited range of phenomena. At a deeper and more fundamental level, everything is made up of quanta or energy — invisible, indivisible energy. We are not separate entities, competing for separate chunks of material resources in accordance with unchangeable natural laws. We are entangled, communicating sub-atomic particles whose identity is determined by the nature and quality of our relationship to each other. There is no objective reality. What we think is real is our perception of reality filtered through our senses and our consciousness. If the particles of my computer mouse stopped moving, I could put my hand through it. The mouse is not “real.

The Newtonian concept of separation and divisibility has led to our divorce from Mother Nature and from our fellow humans — a recipe for fear and negative, stereotyped assumptions about “the other.” This is not how Mother Nature works. Forests and watersheds are interwoven, interdependent ecological systems. Indigenous communities in the Amazon have been nurtured by this relationship and use only what the community needs to survive. When extractive industries such as logging and mining upset this balance, local communities know it and fight for restoration. Mother Nature nurtures when she is nurtured. But if you push her off her axis, she is going to strike back.

If quanta or quantum physics is the true nature of reality at its most fundamental level, how can an out-of-date economic system like capitalism adapt? We must start by identifying the conceptual building blocks of the quantum worldview.

1\. **Reality is integrated and relational**. To think of a chunk of mined coal as distinct from the entire financial, technological, geographical and social infrastructure that created it is a to view it from a Newtonian perspective.

2\. **Reality is multi-dimensional.** Sub-atomic particles exist only as probabilities, not as matter in space and time. They take on characteristic A or characteristic B from the nature of their interaction with each other. Like ultra-violet rays and other frequencies which the human eye cannot see, reality at its most fundamental level exists in other dimensions. There are no fixed immutable laws.

3\. **The observer plays a critical role.** Physicists have verified the quantum nature of reality through their own investigations. The very act of a scientist performing an experiment influences its outcome. This is Schoedinger’s famous paradox of the dead cat in a box. One knows whether it is dead or alive only by opening the box.

**Implications for Capitalism**

Assuming that Einstein, his progeny and the physicists working at the atom-smashing-Large Hadron Collider in Switzerland are right, I see two options: capitalism adapts or is replaced. Either way the criteria, standards, and even mathematical formulations used to assess the value of economic transactions at both micro and macro levels will need to be re-thought and stretched beyond profit and power motives. For example, is the relationship between the economic actors mutually beneficial vs merely exploitive? Is there sufficient communication and understanding between the economic actors to ensure that a range of values, worldviews, even dimensions of reality have been taken into consideration before the transaction is concluded? Do the actors understand that they have the power and responsibility to create an economic playing field that is respectful, balanced and sustainable — one that Mother Nature would approve of?

Consider the current situation of West African traditional fishermen. Today there are insufficient stocks to create a local market or feed their families and communities. Gigantic offshore trawlers from China and the European Union, operating under legal government contracts, are depleting the fishing grounds. Yes, the West African government needs income, but not at the expense of its own citizens, who are offered no alternative except to migrate north. Would China, the largest holder of developing-country debt, be willing to renegotiate lending terms? Can the appetites of Europeans be adjusted to reflect the relationship between a bounty of fresh-caught seafood and a trove of unwanted Black Africans on their doorstep? Apply the standards of the quantum worldview or Quantum Economic to assess this transactional web. Might there be a better way than just giving public money to development banks to lend, creating mounting transaction costs?

**Conclusion**

To bring Mother Nature back to the bargaining table, humanity as a whole must elevate its collective consciousness to grasp the impact of our myriad separate and destructive economic relationships that damage her today. Only then can we begin to unhinge and reconnect. This is where our species’ capacity for change and openness become critical because capitalism, as it currently exists, is too rigid.

©Carol E. Leutner 2024

**Carol E. Leutner** is an award-winning author, lawyer and former international civil servant. She writes on race, economics and culture.

You can learn more about Carol from her first book, _RACE CONSCIOUSNESS, A Personal and Political Journey,_ which won the 2024 Next Generation Indie Book award in the Memoir: History/Legacy category and is available on Amazon. Carol’s second book, focused on 21st-century paradigm shifts, is forthcoming in early 2025. She can be contacted at [www.carolleutner.com.](http://www.carolleutner.com./)
